Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
Available online 14 October 2022
0306-2619/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Energy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/apenergy
How close are urban scale building simulations to measured data? Examining bias derived from building metadata in urban building energy modeling
Brett Bass a,∗, Joshua New a, Nicholas Clinton b, Mark Adams a, Bill Copeland c, Charles Amoo d
a Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, United States b Google Inc., Mountain View, CA, United States c Electric Power Board of Chattanooga, Chattanooga, TN, United States d University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, United States
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords: Buildings Energy Modeling
ABSTRACT
Residential and commercial buildings in the United States accounted for 40% of total energy in 2020. Building energy modeling (BEM) is a useful tool that allows individuals, researchers, companies, or utilities to save energy by optimizing buildings through estimation of building technology savings and performance projection of building energy under various environmental conditions. Urban building energy modeling (UBEM) expands the scope beyond individual buildings to the buildings in a neighborhood, city, utility and more. Yet there is a knowledge gap in the literature as to how these models compare to measured data on an individual and aggregated basis. As UBEM data and methods continue to develop, it is important to consider the accuracy, bias, and limitations of the models. Nation-scale data and UBEM software suite named Automatic Building Energy Modeling (AutoBEM) was used to model 50,843 buildings in Chattanooga, Tennessee. The uncalibrated simulation results were compared to aggregated 15-minute electricity data for the year 2019 with visualizations highlighting sources of bias in building data and the AutoBEM framework while considering how they relate to other UBEM methods. Estimation of building type and year of constructions are found to be the major sources of bias. Accounting for the amount of conditioned area per building significantly improves the overall fit of the simulated energy use intensity. it was found that inherent variation in building energy use contributes to R2 values between 0.008 and 0.095 across building types but slope values near 1 for the total number of buildings. This indicates the need for building aggregation for representative building energy modeling with data sources available at an urban scale while illustrating the need for additional individual building data and model improvement beyond the originally produced UBEM models for individual building analysis.
1. Introduction
With residential and commercial buildings in the United States contributing 39% of carbon emissions, 73% of electricity use, and 80% of electrical demand in 2020, buildings are the most significant opportunity for sustainability. Urban building energy modeling (UBEM) is a growing field within building energy modeling (BEM) for which thousands to millions of buildings are modeled to maximize modeling impact. Creating representative building energy models allows one to understand how different building types, systems, and technologies will perform under various conditions throughout a country. Modeling individual buildings has the potential to enable actionable decisions at the building or portfolio level, while stimulating private sector activity to refine such models toward investment grade status required for financing building retrofits. Modeling individual buildings at city- to nation-scale has the potential to impact energy, demand, emissions,
∗ Corresponding author. E-mail address: bbass7000@gmail.com (B. Bass).
and costs while informing coupling of buildings with the electric grid for resilience. Such building-specific models can be mapped to feeders, substations, or other critical infrastructure and constitute valuable tools for a utility to assess load throughout their service area and facilitate load shaping to cleaner or cheaper generation assets. There is significant complexity when developing a representative building energy model as no two buildings perform exactly the same. Some of the bias that is attributable to the unique energy performance of each building can be eliminated through simulation adjustment or calibration to measured data, but performance data is rarely available for each building. For this reason, it is valuable to understand and quantify the sources of inherent bias for uncalibrated UBEM. Comparing measured and simulated (predicted) annual energy use intensity (EUI) is useful as it allows buildings of all sizes to be compared and better understand sources of bias. While previous UBEM has validated individual
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2022.120049 Received 22 June 2022; Received in revised form 23 August 2022; Accepted 24 September 2022


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
2
B. Bass et al.
buildings for hundreds to two thousand buildings against monthly or annual data, this paper validates 50,843 building energy models against sub-hourly (15-min.) measured data and analyzes systemic bias. This analysis investigates bias and the sources of bias in Automatic Building Energy Modeling (AutoBEM) [1], a UBEM framework that has been used to model hundreds of millions of buildings since it was developed including the creation and sharing of a model of 122.9 million buildings (97.8% of the United States) [2]. In one analysis, AutoBEM was used to model nearly 180,000 buildings of the Electric Power Board of Chattanooga, Tennessee (EPB). In close partnership with this utility, related research includes validation against measured data [3,4], estimates of building retrofit technology savings [5,6], and forecasting of building energy use under various climate scenarios [7]. AutoBEM is a bottom-up, physics-based UBEM framework. These modeling frameworks produce a physics-based building energy model for each building in the area of interest. This method has many advantages including individual building granularity and the ability to modify the building energy model to evaluate different building technologies in an effort to save energy, demand, cost, and emissions. As examples This allows the user to determine which buildings are good candidates for a certain technology or understand how grid resilience will be impacted by a heatwave. If individual building resolution is not necessary, top-down UBEM approaches can be used. These approaches are typically data-focused and are at a municipality scale, often incorporating economic, transportation, and other pertinent urban data into their predictions. The measured data from the utility is used to examine the sources of bias in the AutoBEM models and input data. AutoBEM used a variety of data sources to generate a building energy model for every building in EPB’s service area, simulate with weather data from the same year as measured data (2019), and compare simulation outputs to measured data. Annual building EUI is used to compare buildings in this area with the models generated using AutoBEM as well as the typical U.S. building stock. While this analysis covers a single UBEM framework, many sources of bias are applicable to common UBEM methods. Reviews such as [8,9] contain many state of the art UBEM methods and a fairly comprehensive summary of UBEM efforts is contained in [10]. Many of the methods utilize similar physical building data, building energy modeling simulation engines, and related data that likely leads to similar sources of bias. The authors of this work anticipate and encourage other studies to reproduce and compare against the findings of this paper as a step toward establishment of best-practices and standards for UBEM. UBEM biases are introduced into the simulated data from a variety of sources. Simulation results are likely to be heavily influenced by occupant behavior not just at the individual building level but at the urban level [11]. The influence of occupant behaviors on UBEM simulation results is primarily from the challenge of accurately and fully incorporating diversity in equipment schedules and other energyrelated occupant activities into building models’ EUI or timing of energy use. This is relevant in residential districts where occupancy can significantly affect peak demand and energy use [12]. Some of the occupant behaviors vary from passive exchange of heat with space; opening and closing doors and windows; adjustment of thermostat settings, light setting, blinds and shades, or clothing levels; use of personal heating and cooling devices; and consumption of warm or cold drinks’ [13]. Many studies assert that the factors which motivate occupant activities in buildings are many and include occupants’ personal choice, environmental behaviors, social interactions and the general cultural context [14–16]. Another source of bias in UBEM simulation data is using typical weather environment (or representative city) for an entire district or city without considering the true meteorological conditions at that place and time—including microclimate variation between the building and closest weather data (usu. airports) [11]. The urban climate and microclimate, and how they interact with building models, can have
a significant impact on building energy use [17]. These conditions can affect the air temperature and humidity of the local environment, movement of air, solar radiation as well as specular and diffuse reflections [18]. There is also a reverse action of buildings on the boundary conditions of urban canopy modes in the following ways: (1) the building geometries and layout have thermal effects on heat and airflow [19]; (2) heat exchange between the buildings’ exterior surface and the urban environment through simulation of sensible heat convection and radiation; and (3) the release of heat and moisture by buildings to the urban environment through cooling towers, condensing units and exhaust air [11]. The bidirectional impacts of buildings and the urban environment on one another needs to be factored properly into the assessment of UBEM. To demonstrate how the use of more weather stations can reduce temperature bias, [20] used all available weather stations within the IECC climate zone over the western U.S. in a UBEM and this led to a reduction of the average absolute summertime temperature bias from 4.0 ◦C to 1.5 ◦C. The distribution of internal loads in buildings can vary widely from one building to the other, even when they are of the same type and vintage. This can lead to significant discrepancy between simulated energy use and what is actually consumed [21]. While energy use is in buildings are more complex, modeling uncertainties often lead to a simplification of mechanical systems and their controls which fail to fully capture the dynamic behavior or part-load use of the mechanical systems including the response from their control systems [22]. Parameters related to specifications for HVAC use, systems and plants scheduling, and casual gains can all lead to an incomplete or inaccurate modeling of buildings energy systems [23]. [24] detected performance gap in thermal modeling and linked it an underestimation of the values used for specifying fan powers in simulation compared to actual use. Also, [25] identified a similar underestimation of lighting loads as a significant source of source bias in simulated building energy use. Several other building energy researchers have explored the relationship between measured and predicted EUI. A review of UBEM techniques in 2016 aggregated error rates for UBEM applications of the time and reported average error ranges well above 10% [26]. The UBEM applications in this study also were relatively small compared to today’s standard, with the majority of studies focusing on less than 100 buildings. Another more recent review of 78 UBEM analyses reported error ranges from 1% to 1000% for single buildings [27]. A recent study of 1.2 million London residential buildings compared measured EUI to the UK’s Asset Rating tool value [28] with a weak correlation indicated between the measured data and the building efficiency rating values. An older work compared measured and predicted daily EUI for the city of Houston, TX. It was found that the daily predictions were typically within 10% of existing building types. Because of their daily scale, a focus on hourly patterns was evaluated with general prototype building schedules specified as a primary source of error in the predictions. A study of 172 residential buildings in Kuwait emphasized the need for stochastic occupant modeling in UBEM, showing that deterministic models ignore uncertainties up to 30% when considering single buildings [29]. A 2016 review evaluated the measured vs simulated EUI of building energy modeling tools for various building types all over the world. While not a UBEM review, this work highlights several sources of bias in individual building energy modeling that naturally relate to UBEM [29]. While there are many comparisons of simulated to measured building energy use in the literature, few of these exercises have been done for multiple buildings, let alone at an urban scale. This analysis compares tens of thousands of simulations to measured building energy data to better understand the strengths and limitations of UBEM frameworks as well as typical data that must be used at the urban scale.


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
3
B. Bass et al.
2. Materials and methods
To assess differences in simulated and measured data, individual building simulations were compared to measured meter electricity data for a sample of real buildings. In partnership with EPB, measured electricity data for the year 2019 was shared from smart meters in Chattanooga, Tennessee for 50,843 buildings used in this study. The data was shared as 15-minute electricity data but was aggregated and scaled by the area to be analyzed as annual electricity use intensity. AutoBEM utilizes OpenStudio to generate building energy models and EnergyPlus to simulate the developed models. OpenStudio is a collection of open-source software tools to support energy modeling in EnergyPlus, which is a physical building energy simulation engine [30,31]. AutoBEM uses a set of nation-scale input data from each building to develop a building energy model, some of which are obtained directly while others are either assumed or algorithmically inferred based on other building characteristics. This model can then be reviewed, modified, simulated, or analyzed within the OpenStudio interface. AutoBEM requires two primary physical building characteristics, building footprint (widely available) and height (currently more difficult). Building type and building vintage (i.e. year of building code assumptions) are two performance related properties that must also be specified for each building and methods vary significantly in their accuracy for these characteristics when extending beyond the current, geographically limited databases. The building type and code properties that are implemented in each custom-building energy model are taken from Department of Energy prototype building energy models which provide a model representing the typical building of that type and age. The commercial prototype building energy models currently cover 75% of commercial building floor area in the United States [32]. From these four building characteristics (footprint, height, type, age), all other building properties can be inferred by using data collected for reference or prototype models. As examples—occupancy schedule, floor-to-floor height, and heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) type, window-to-wall ratio, etc., can be assumed from the building type while insulation and building infiltration values can be assumed by the age of the building. These building properties may be implemented directly into the model if available, but they are typically not available for individual buildings at an urban scale. Some work has been done to classify facade types, window percentage and other individual building properties using machine learning on streetview [33–36] while others have attempted to determine the building occupancy schedules for individual buildings at a large scale using data such as mobile phones or traffic patterns [37–41]. These studies are essential in improving individual building energy model quality, but these data sources and techniques are not available for all locations. Because of this, prototype building properties are used for this study. It is the author’s hope that these techniques may be evaluated at this large scale in the future to quantify the improvement these high resolution features add to the building energy model. The AutoBEM input data for these buildings were gathered from a variety of sources that vary across open source, commercially available, proprietary, and business-sensitive. Building footprints were obtained from Google’s proprietary database of building footprints. This database contains approximately 165 million building footprints and metadata describing physical characteristics of the building as well as one or more uses. It is assumed that the building footprint represents the total conditioned area of the building with the height being the maximum usable floor area. While the DOE prototype buildings have both conditioned and unconditioned thermal zones, and related space types, AutoBEM models are simplified to one thermal zone per floor due to the limitations and computational expense of auto-zoning to a more accurate core–perimeter zoning model. While this assumption is naive, AutoBEM models with the same area as fully zoned DOE prototype
Table 1
The data types and sources used as input to AutoBEM to generate building energy models. Data type Data source
Building footprint Google Earth Engine [46] Building height JAXA [42] Building type DOE Prototype Buildings [32] Building age GAIA [45] Chattanooga 2019 weather Climate One Building [47]
models have average energy intensity values within 8% of the prototypes. Future work will incorporate a more accurate perimeter–core zoning model. For this study, building heights are estimated using photogrammetric methods on multi-look imagery, LiDAR, or convolutional methods on the ALOS AW3D30 digital surface model version 2.2 provided by the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) [42]. Building type is estimated from Google’s use type(s) which are mapped to the closest prototype building. While the building types in Google’s database are assumed to be correct, the mapping of hundreds of building types to 20 prototype buildings results in a loss of resolution in some building types. Also, because current prototype building energy models only cover 75% of commercial building floor area, there are some building types that have no direct mapping. For these building types, building survey data from sources such as RECS and CBECS were used to find the closest representative prototype building based on building energy use intensity [43,44]. If there are multiple building types for a single building (representing a mixed-use building), the most common use case was used for the building type. While AutoBEM has the ability to model simple mixed-use buildings (first floor of building is assigned to be the first building type while remaining floors assigned to be the second), this feature is still in development and not validated. Additionally, data illustrating how mixed-use buildings were divided was not available in this dataset. The year built was estimated from the date of urbanization (after 1985) as represented in the global artificial impervious area (GAIA) dataset [45] at 30 m ground resolution. The dataset was additionally gap-filled using surrounding neighborhood properties to increase building information coverage with a potential tradeoff regarding accuracy. The estimated year built was used to sort each building into one of the building code vintages. As the age dataset only goes as far back as 1985, buildings with that designation were assigned to the ‘‘Pre1980’’ or ‘‘1980–2004’’ building code using a weighted assignment that accounted for the chance that the building was constructed between 1980 and 1985. A summary of each of these data types with their sources is shown in Table 1. The input data was fed into the AutoBEM software in which the 50,843 building energy models were generated in about 12 h at an average of about 35 core-sec per building. The models were then simulated using an actual meteorological year weather file for the year 2019, corresponding to the year of the measured data. The simulations required about 1.8 h at a rate of about 5 core-sec per building. The electricity data was then aggregated and compared to the measured electricity data with awareness this could cause a discrepancy that is explored in the results. The bias of uncalibrated AutoBEM models is then examined. Various post-processing steps were implemented to adjust and minimize discrepancies between the measured and simulated data. As only electric data was provided by the utility, all buildings were converted to be 100% electric for comparison. This assumption is evaluated in the results of this analysis. This is illustrated in Fig. 1 where the annualized monthly EUI is compared to the average monthly temperature. The process for generating models and comparing to measured data can be divided into four steps: (1) Data aggregation (2) Building energy model generation (3) Building energy model simulation (4) Comparison of building energy model simulation electricity data to


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
4
B. Bass et al.
Fig. 1. The annualized measured EUI (electric only) for each month is compared with the average monthly temperature for the year 2019. The energy spikes in the winter months indicate electricity as a primary heating source for the buildings in the EPB service area.
Fig. 2. The workflow steps with software or data types required for each step.
measured electricity data. The workflow is shown in Fig. 2. This work focuses on the attribution of bias between building energy models and measured energy use data to important data inputs (e.g., building type and vintage). The bias in the input data is quantified using lines of best fit, R2, percent errors, and distribution visualization group by each of the input variables.
3. Results
Measured data from 50,843 selected buildings in EPB’s service territory is compared to individual simulations with visualizations for illustrating how well the models represent the measured data. For the following visualizations, the EUI values consist of only electricity. The models were converted to all electric HVAC and water heating for a better comparison to the all electric data measured data. The lack of natural gas data is considered in a bias adjustment further in the document. The data is filtered to include only buildings with measured EUI less than 3000 kWh/m2, more than double the greatest energy intensity of any commercial building [48]. This filtered 242 buildings from the visualizations, all of which are assumed to be faulty data. Aggregated EUI values are compared in this analysis. In all visualizations, even though the axes are smaller than 3000 kWh/m2, the data points not seen in the visualizations were included in distributions, only visually omitted because of the sparsity at these higher energy intensities. These points still impact the box-plot distributions and lines of best fit. Scatter plots, box plots, lines of best fit, and R2 can be valuable to consider when comparing the measured and simulated EUI as they highlight different trends. The scatter plots and best fit lines illustrate
how well the simulations capture the measured EUI trend for the entire energy intensity range. The R2 value signifies how well the simulations explain the variability in the measured data while the box plots display how well the measured and simulated EUI distributions align. It is important to remember that the goal of most UBEM analysis is to adequately model aggregated groups of buildings, meaning that capturing each outlier building may not be necessary or possible as long as the overall distribution is captured. Though this may not be true for all UBEM use cases. According to measured data, approximately 80% of buildings have an EUI of less than 150 kWh/m2 and 89% have an EUI less than 300 kWh/m2. While some of the other trends in the data are important, it is most valuable to focus on trends with the largest number of buildings. The number of buildings at each EUI level for each building type is shown in Fig. 3. Most of the building type distributions have an EUI less than 150 kWh/m2 and are right skewed. The restaurant building class is the main exception with a somewhat uniform distribution. The restaurant is the prototype building with the highest energy intensity so it makes sense that there would be a significant amount of high intensity buildings in that class. The amount of buildings classified as pre-2004 is also apparent from the Figure. This is an expected result as 84% of commercial and residential buildings in the US were constructed before 2000 [43,44]. Raw measured vs simulated EUI results are shown in Fig. 4. It is interesting to note that buildings with measured data close to zero could be unoccupied, only function for a short time each year, or have faulty/missing data. These close to zero EUI buildings were not filtered out of the data as they could be real data, but these low measured EUI values will result in a simulation over-estimation. They also lead


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
5
B. Bass et al.
Fig. 3. Measured building energy use distributions are shown for each building type and separated by building age. Most building types have a skewed right distribution and measured median EUI less than 150 kWh/m2. (Note differences in scale for y-axes).
to lower R2 values for the estimation. The color difference in Fig. 4 indicates the number of buildings at a given measured and simulated EUI to compensate for the overplotting of close to 50,000 data points. The area of highest density occur at a simulated EUI of about 110 kWh/m2. One apparent trend is simulations’ over-prediction of energy use for buildings with measured EUI less than 300 kWh/m2. Simulated EUI is greater than the measured EUI for the area of high density. One possible source of this over-prediction is the mismatch between total and conditioned floor area common in many BEM models. In the US, 87% of residential building area is heated and 68% is cooled while 80% of commercial building area is heated and 70% is cooled [43,44]. Currently, AutoBEM or available data sources have no direct way of indicating what percent of a building area is conditioned, so 100% conditioned area is assumed. Here we test a strategy to correct for this conditioned area mismatch. Bias adjustment for the potential concerns can be realized through post-processing or scaling of simulation data. The heating and cooling energy may be scaled by the percentage of heating and cooling area for both commercial and residential buildings separately. An additional post-processing scaling factor (33% reduction) was applied to the heating energy of each building to account for the average percentage of buildings that use natural gas for heating (1 in 3 Tennessee buildings use natural gas for heating) [49]. While there is also natural gas and other fuel types used for building equipment, these could not be easily estimated for Chattanooga. The measured and simulated EUI comparison with simulated results scaled by conditioned area percentages is shown in Fig. 5. The scaled simulation results better represent the measured data as shown by the line of best fit. The slope of the line of best fit increases from 0.75 to 0.9 after the scaling. This shows that even though much of the variance of the building energy use is not explained by individual building energy models (over and under-prediction), the scaled models
effectively represent the aggregated buildings. The simulated EUI in the high density area in the Figure (measured and simulated ∼ 110 kWh/m2) is much closer to the measured EUI after the post-processing. There are many buildings for which this post-processing creates a wider discrepancy between measured and simulated EUI but the overall fit is improved. For some of the buildings for which the scaling increased the model error, individual building error could be reduced if more building data describing the amount of conditioned area, HVAC type, or building equipment for each building was available. The postprocessing or modeling itself could be more representative if a less broad assumption was used. Figs. 4 and 5 collectively illustrate the scale at which uncalibrated UBEM models are applicable and the importance of model calibration for smaller scale analyses. It is challenging to capture individual building variation without additional data or different modeling techniques. The difference between measured and simulated can also be quantified through the error distribution. The error is quantified using Eq. (1).
Error = (Measured − Simulated)
Measured (1)
Table 2 shows the relative error distributions between the measured and simulated energy use. The raw simulations significantly overpredict the measured data while the bias adjusted simulations only slightly over-predict, with the median error is much closer to 0 after the bias adjustment. With central statistical error values closer to 0, the simulations are better the sum of building energy use, though the rest of the distributions indicate they are not properly capturing individual building variability. These bias adjustments can be implemented directly into AutoBEM to improve simulations on future modeling efforts. Additionally, if measured data is available, models may be calibrated to the measured data to reduce individual building bias.


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
6
B. Bass et al.
Fig. 4. Modeled vs. actual energy performance gap for 50,843 buildings (Point density is indicated by color change). Original simulation results compared to raw measured data has an overall fitness of R2 = 0.069.
Fig. 5. Modeled vs. actual energy performance gap for 50,843 buildings when bias-corrected for average energy type and conditioned area mismatches shows similar with overall fitness of R2 = 0.069. (Point density is indicated by color change).
Table 2
The relative percent error distributions are shown for the raw data and with bias adjustments. Because simulated values are subtracted from the measured values, negative values represent an over-prediction while positive values represent an under-prediction. Model output 1st Quartile Median Mean 3rd Quartile
Raw −91% −32% −47% 12% With bias adjustments −54% −6% −18% 30%


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
7
B. Bass et al.
Fig. 6. The monthly energy use intensity comparison illustrates the months where the simulations are most representative of the measured data. It also shows how the bias adjustments reduce some of the simulation error.
Table 3
The percent error is greatest in the winter months where there is more uncertainty about the type of building energy used for heating. Month Raw error Adjusted error
Jan −110% −50% Feb −119% −63% Mar −245% −163% Apr −66% −47% May −37% −23% Jun −35% −20% Jul −32% −14% Aug −38% −19% Sep −47% −27% Oct −55% −41% Nov −42% −17% Dec −79% −39%
To aid comparison with other work, monthly comparison of measured and simulated EUI for both raw and bias-adjusted data is shown in Fig. 6. It shows how bias adjustment improves simulations’ estimation of measured monthly electricity data. In this study, measured and simulated monthly energy differences were much larger in winter months than the summer months. Significant winter bias may be introduced due to the variability of individual building heating sources. The monthly raw and bias-adjusted error rates are shown in Table 3. Winter error rates are reduced by the adjustment for conditioned area and the amount of buildings using natural gas for heating. The summer percent errors are also reduced by the conditioned area adjustment. We anticipate remaining bias related to buildings’ use of other fuel types throughout the year, which is why simulations underestimate measured data. UBEM often attempts to identify the year of building construction, assume the building was built to code requirements at that time/place, and use building code definitions for that year and climate zone to assume all characteristics required for a fully-defined and simulatable building energy model. For this analysis, the building code refers to the building code for buildings in the Chattanooga climate zone (4 A) at time of construction. Building code has a significant impact on building energy use as older buildings use more energy than newer ones. Fig. 7 uses scatter plots to quantify the distribution differences found in this study for different building codes. The difficulty of individual building code classification due to uncertainty of whether improvements have
been made to buildings or new technology is being used is highlighted in this Figure. Data sources such as tax-assessors’ data may be able to identify the last year of renovation but identifying which building properties were upgraded is an outstanding challenge. Relevant data sources for addressing bias, which are rarely available beyond a single municipality, suffer from differences in naming conventions, formatting, and ultimate make joining tax-assessors or other data for multiple municipalities into a single UBEM data source intractable. While it is not currently possible to perfect individual building code classification with available data sources, many UBEM analyses focus on groups of buildings where the aggregate distribution is most important. Table 4 quantifies the linear fit and accuracy of energy consumption for different building codes. The authors hope that other researchers and practitioners might attempt to reproduce such results in their studies. If other studies reproduce similar trends, systemic biases in building energy modeling may be properly prioritized and investigated. In our study, both old and new buildings have a slopes less than 1. The R2 values indicate that there is still significant energy variability in all individual buildings within each code class. Low R2 values are expected in building energy modeling due to the fundamental variability in building energy use amongst buildings. Median error values close to 0 indicate that there is a similar amount of over and under-estimation of the measured data. There are other factors besides building age that could influence the bias in the simulations. Building type is another important variable in building energy modeling that could contribute to the bias. Visualizing the measured and simulated EUI by building type illuminates which simulations best represent the measured data and also which buildings may be improperly labeled. The EUI comparison by building type is shown in Fig. 8. The individual building variation within each building class is apparent in the Figure with measured EUI ranging from 0 to more than 1800 kWh/m2 (out of Figure axes) for some building types, helping convey why low R2 values are achieved in this analysis. An interesting observation for Fig. 8 is that the under-estimated energy consumption of the warehouse building type. In the DOE prototype building, warehouses are unconditioned except for 10% of the floor area for an office. These warehouses could have the incorrect building type label, be fully conditioned, or be refrigerated. Warehouse is also a building class which may encompass actual building types for which prototype building energy models have not yet been developed, such as manufacturing or logistics sites (There are currently no prototype building energy models for manufacturing buildings). In all such cases,


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
8
B. Bass et al.
Fig. 7. Plot of modeled vs actual energy consumption, by building code, shows the spread of fits for each building code. The EUI of older buildings tends to be higher.
Fig. 8. Of the 5127 commercial buildings in the sample, the retail, and offices are the most common have a slopes close to 1. The range of the lines of best fit show the various ranges of the building types. Building types with notable ranges are the warehouses (low simulated EUI) and the restaurants (high simulated EUI).
Table 4
Building code fits are shown with R2 values describing the quality of the fit for each building code. Older buildings of all ages have a slope closer to 1 while newer buildings have much lower median percent error. Building code Fit equation R2 Median error # Buildings
Pre-2004 y = 0.908x + 7 0.074 −8.4% 39,540 Post-2004 y = 0.732x + 7 0.025 1.2% 11,163


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
9
B. Bass et al.
Table 5
The offices and retail are the most common commercial building types and have two of the closest slopes to 1, best following the measured EUI trend for all ranges. The low R2 values for each building type is likely due to the inherent variation in building data within building classes. Building type Fit line R2 Median error # Buildings
Office y = 0.81x + 18 0.004 −41% 2,761 Medical y = 0.59x + 10 0.005 −131% 327 Apartment y = 0.01x + 41 0.01 −70% 98 School y = 0.92x - 13 0.018 −109% 172 Retail y = 1.11x + 6 0.012 −29% 972 Restaurant y = 1.24x - 48 0.02 −11% 340 Hotel y = 0.71x - 14 0.07 −130% 79 Residential y = 2.3x - 26 0.022 −3% 45,547 Warehouse y = 2.58x + 47 0.032 75% 310
Fig. 9. The measured energy variance within building type groups can be seen by showing the retail and restaurant, which have EUI values close to 0 and greater than 1800 kWh/m2 .
measured energy use would greatly exceed the simulated energy use. Such differences are likely amongst all building types as no two buildings, even of the same type, will consume energy in the exact same way. Each unique building will contain different features that are not exactly modeled in the prototype buildings. The linear fit equations and validation metrics per building type are shown in Table 5. For these buildings, the residential buildings tend to under-predict (slope above 1) while the commercial buildings tend to over-predict (slope below 1). The R2 are low, indicating significant variability amongst buildings of the same type that is challenging to capture at a UBEM level. The variance of measured energy use within building type groups can be better seen in Fig. 9 which shows only the restaurant and retail building types. The huge discrepancy in energy usage leads to low R2 in simulation. This also highlights why large scale building energy modeling efforts must focus on modeling the typical building unless more specific building data (occupancy, HVAC type) is available. While scatter plots compare the measured and simulated EUI for individual buildings, visualizing the EUI comparison by building type using a box plot better indicates how each building type represents the distribution of buildings. For many UBEM analyses, representing the aggregate building distributions may be the primary goal, with individual building model simulation quality of little consequence as long as the aggregation of the buildings is represented. The measured and simulated EUI distributions are shown in a box plot in Fig. 10. The measured EUI distributions shown here for each building type
are notably lower than building type survey values [48], but this is expected in part as only electricity is reported for these buildings. An attempt was made to account for this using post-processing but more descriptive data would allow for more exact scaling. The medians of the simulated building distributions for each building type align mostly closely with the measured distributions for residential, offices, and retail. The warehouse significantly under-predicts due to the variability in what is considered a warehouse as previously already discussed. The under-prediction in warehouses could also be caused by an inclusion of industrial buildings into the warehouse building type, as they contain several similar properties. The rest of the distributions tend to over-predict compared to the measured data. This is because 71% of this dataset is classified as pre-2004 and older codes produced higher energy intensity simulations. A box plot showing the EUI comparison separated by old (pre-2004) and new (post-2004) is shown in Fig. 11. This illustrates the overprediction for most building types for old (pre-2004) buildings and the under-prediction for new (post-2004) buildings. Because the majority (71%) of the buildings were classified as pre-2004, the distributions of all building codes shown in Fig. 10 over-estimate energy intensity for commercial building types. Though conditioned area was crudely accounted for using a postprocessing step, other sources of bias still exist in the data. One such source of bias is derived from mixed-use buildings. AutoBEM and many UBEM software currently only allow for a single building type per


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
10
B. Bass et al.
Fig. 10. The simulated EUI distribution over-estimate compared to the measured distributions for most building types though there is often overlap between the quartiles of the distributions.
Fig. 11. The older buildings tend to over-estimate energy intensity while the newer buildings tend to under-estimate energy intensity for most building types.
building (though mixed-use capabilities are being developed). Mixeduse buildings may significantly bias a model depending what the combination of buildings types is. For example, modeling an entire building as a restaurant when only 20% of the floor area is a restaurant and the other 80% is an apartment will result in a huge energy intensity discrepancy between measured and simulated. The smaller than expected measured EUI value could also be partially caused by bias in the building footprint (by including nearby objects as a part of the footprint) or building height (by assigning height value based on nearby object or object on top of building such as antenna or equipment). Both would increase the building area while the measured data remained the same, leading to a decrease in measured energy intensity. Another source of bias is the matching between electrical meters and building footprints. This can lead to a mis-classified building type or an incorrect building
footprint. Some properties have a single meter for multiple buildings for which the energy is aggregated. This can cause a disparity depending on the type of mismatch. For example, if a small office is next to a manufacturing plant for administration and there is a single electrical meter at the office building, the simulation will greatly underestimate the actual energy use of the building complex. In addition, a building’s electrical meter may not be located directly on the building which could lead to a mismatch with a building that is not on the property.
4. Discussion
There are a few main sources of bias that are evident from the results. While there may be some bias in AutoBEM (or UBEM frameworks generally), the majority of the bias is derived from the input


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
11
B. Bass et al.
Table 6
Bias sources. Bias source Description Result
Building height Nearby Objects Increased Area Objects on Roof
Footprint Expanded Footprint Increased Area Mismatched Electrical Meter Energy Discrepancy
Building type Mis-label Energy Discrepancy Irregular Building Mixed Use Buildings
Code Mis-label Energy Discrepancy Building Refurbishments
Weather Single Weather File Energy Discrepancy
Measured data Missing Data Simulation Over-estimation Misread data Simulation Under-estimation
data, which has a huge impact on individual simulation performance compared to measured data. There are two main sources of bias in the input data: missing or limited data describing each building and mis-labeled data. The first source of bias related to input data is missing or limited data. This data is not readily available at a scale that is usable for UBEM analyses. Examples of this are the amount of conditioned area per building and the equipment in the building (HVAC, lighting, etc.). An attempt was made to account for the amount of conditioned area per building but an estimate of the ratio of conditioned to unconditioned area would provide a much better post-processing factor compared to a factor which assumes all buildings have the same ratio. This postprocessing improved the fit of the models, improving the slope of the measured vs simulated fit from 0.75 to 0.9 and the median relative percent error from −32% to −6%. Knowing that this post-processing step improves performance of the models, a decision will have to be made on whether to incorporate unconditioned area directly into the models or continue to post-process based on conditioned area statistics for buildings in a particular region. Incorporating the unconditioned area directly into the models may better represent the physics of the buildings while post-processing offers additional flexibility. We also recommend that, where possible, accurate thermal zoning and space types be defined for the building. In addition to the conditioned area, the equipment of the building is determined by the building type and code classification but better estimates of the exact type of equipment in the actual building would undoubtedly improve the simulations. The prototype building assumption can cause issues for unique buildings that do not fit directly with the prototype buildings. An example of this in the results are warehouses, where a single type of warehouse is modeled while real warehouses could have a wide variety of energy profiles based on their use. This can be true for any building type as the actual energy use of an individual building may not match the function of the building, may actually be a better fit for a different prototype, or does not fit any prototype. More prototypes are continually being developed in an attempt to cover as much of the built environment as possible but current prototypes only cover about 75% of residential and commercial buildings (no manufacturing buildings). Even with a close prototype match, building characteristics such as the occupancy schedule or window-to-wall ratio are unlikely to be exactly the same as the prototype and result in biased simulations. The building code is derived from the year built and is the origin of another limitation. The results show that older building models tended to over-predict compared to newer buildings. For most older buildings, it is likely there have been upgrades to the building since construction that would improve building energy performance. This difference between the year of construction and the upgraded performance of the building is not accounted for in the data or AutoBEM software. More descriptive data such as percent of conditioned floor area, HVAC type, year of renovation, etc., could be incorporated into the UBEM workflows to improve modeling outcomes.
There are also input data limitations related to the physical properties of the building. Building footprint segmentation algorithms are good at identifying lone buildings but struggle at times to properly identify building footprints in crowded areas or with many objects around. This can lead to an increase in building area. Building height is another source of bias as the maximum height of the building is often used and incorporated into conditioned area of the building. Many buildings do not have a flat roof or have items on the roof that could increase the height value, thereby increasing the building area. The use of a single weather file to represent a large geographic area creates additional bias in the simulations. In reality, there could be microclimates that impact weather conditions at each building location and affect energy use. The other source of bias related to the input data is mis-labeled data. When analyzing tens of thousands of buildings, it is possible that some of the input data could be mis-labeled. It is also possible that the building type changes over time. This mis-labeled data can be a source of bias in the simulations. This mis-labeled data can be more challenging to detect but comparison of high-resolution measured data to prototype simulation data may be a way to estimate if a building is performing drastically different compared to the assigned building class. Mis-labeling may also be introduced by the matching of electrical meters to individual buildings. A single electrical meter may represent multiple buildings in which case selecting the building for which case the building simulation will likely not properly represent the real building. The bias direction for this source is dependent on how the buildings are mismatched. Finally, there may also be bias in the measured energy data. There are building electrical meters that were missing data, had data that was mostly over the course of a year, and had data that would be large enough for a single hour that would make it extremely unlikely. An attempt was made to address some of this problematic data with filtering but some of this data likely made it into the analysis. A summary of sources of bias in the input data are shown in Table 6. Most of the sources of bias typically results in an increased simulation energy use. The bias in building footprint both may increase the conditioned area which leads to a larger simulated energy use and smaller measured EUI. Mismatch of building electrical meter to building footprint can introduce bi-directional bias depending the size and types of buildings. Building code typically results in increased energy use bias as the age of the building may not represent updates or retrofits that may be in the building. The building type bias may result in increased or decreased simulated energy use, though it often results in a simulated energy use increase as mis-classified or mixed use buildings tend to over-predict compared to measured data. This is because of the larger EUI of commercial buildings compared to the more common, lower EUI residential buildings. The simulation bias derived from input building data described above applies to many UBEM methods. These methods, regardless of whether they model each building individually or model representative


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
12
B. Bass et al.
building and scale results, typically employ similar input data consisting of building footprints/area, height, type, and age. Because of the importance of these variables and the impact they have on modeling outcomes, it is critical to understand how they are sources of bias, the usual direction of bias for each variable, and the limitations of the input data. While individual building results may be considered for UBEM analysis, it is important to remember the aggregated distributions are often valuable as well. The low R2 values for the total buildings or among the building types do not necessarily mean that the models are poor, rather that additional data and modeling is required to improve individual models. Understanding the bias in the data sources is the first step to improving these data sources and UBEM methods. As the UBEM data sources and methods continue to improve, it is possible these models will be more viable on an individual building basis, increasing the impact of building energy modeling. In addition to gathering more data to improve the building energy models, this study underlines the importance of model calibration in UBEM analyses. While some, individual building variation may be captured with higher resolution data (e.g., occupancy, construction materials, window-to-wall ratio), the thousands of inputs required to create a representative model without calibration to measured data remains a challenge both at the individual building and at the urban scale. Hybrid building energy modeling may be another solution to this problem. Hybrid models combine machine learning or statistical inference with physics-based models. One form of hybrid BEM has been explored in Materials and Methods Section where examples are given of extraction of building properties to be used as inputs to physics-based simulation tools are derived from machine learning. Such a hybrid approach retains the benefits of using a simulation engine where different technologies may be directly input with performance curves and specific properties to estimate building performance characteristics. It also has the benefit of producing physically realistic results at a variety of temporal scales. There is another form of hybrid model which was not explored in this document that could also reduce the bias caused by many of the assumptions present in physics-based UBEM frameworks. This hybrid model utilizes the outputs from physics equations as well as building metadata to predict building energy use (or relevant building performance metric). While these models incorporate measured data and thus may not suffer from the biases inherent with many of the assumptions of physics-based models, there are also significant biases in the training of machine learning models that must be addressed. These models also are not bounded to produce physically realistic estimations of building energy use are they only use physical equations as an input and mostly rely on statistical relations. While there are many examples of gathering input building data for physics-based UBEM [33–40] [41], there are still few and only small-scale examples of utilizing physics outputs in a data-based model [50]. Both hybrid model architectures require further validation that may soon be possible in large-scale UBEM analyses.
5. Limitations
There are several major limitations of the UBEM study. First, reliance on (only) electricity data limits the broader applicability of the work. Moreover, having other energy types would allow for a more reliable comparison between models and measured data. Second, use of general building characteristic data sources is limited, difficult, and intractable for many organizations. While thousands of inputs are defined for each model, only a few are directly measured, and most are interpreted or assumed from other data (e.g., building vintage). It could be useful to incorporate new data sources such as occupancy, window-to-wall ratio of each facade, and other building sources using state of the art methods to better characterize and predict how specific building data impacts the performance of the building energy models.
Third, this study relies upon only one simulation engine. Other UBEM frameworks may be based on different software or methods leading to different observations of bias. Fourth, DOE prototype buildings were developed based on US building stock, meaning many of the assumptions that UBEM analyses rely on would differ in countries across the globe where building types, occupancy, and use differ. Finally, biases are derived from a single geographical area; Chattanooga biases may be different from either a major metropolitan area (e.g., New York City or Los Angeles) or more rural building stock. For example, mixeduse buildings are more predominant in high-density downtown areas of major cities. The generalizations made in UBEM, and specifically the lack of support for mixed-used buildings in this study, are anticipated to have an adverse result on building energy modeling quality. This study is focused on uncalibrated UBEM models. Calibration of building energy models is a subcategory of BEM that is growing quickly with a variety of different methods. While uncalibrated models were the focus of this work, model calibration may dampen many of the biases present in the analysis.
6. Conclusions
This article compares measured and simulated building energy data for more than 50 thousand buildings in Chattanooga, TN. There are several primary findings from this work: (1) An uncalibrated UBEM framework (AutoBEM) is compared to measured data to evaluate its performance, both on individual buildings and the aggregated building distributions. Individual results were compared using scatter plots and trendlines while the distributions were compared using box-plots. It was found that the overall trend of the simulations was captured effectively with a measured vs simulated slope of close to 1 while the individual building variability was not as consistently modeled with R2 values below 0.1. This is due to individual building variation and the type of data sources that must be used when modeling at an individual scale. If UBEM frameworks are to be used for individual building modeling, additional data must be gathered and a further modeling effort should be completed to improve the models to a more representative state. (2) Possible sources of bias in the input data to the AutoBEM framework are examined as explanations for bias in the measured and simulated building energy comparison. The primary sources of bias examined were building age, building type, building shape/size, and building related weather. (3) These sources of bias are explored, considering how these sources of bias affect all UBEM analysis. While the bias is explored for AutoBEM, most UBEM frameworks rely on similar building features and datasets, meaning most bias sources in AutoBEM can be reasonably extrapolated to other UBEM analyses. (4) Solutions to some of these bias sources are implemented or proposed. The solutions to each source of bias are unique to each bias source. One solution explored in this work was to scale the simulation results by the amount of conditioned area per building type in the region. Though, proper calibration and/or hybrid physics and machine learning approaches will be essential to accurate large-scale UBEM modeling.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Brett Bass: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Visualization. Joshua New: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition. Nicholas Clinton: Data curation, Writing – review & editing. Mark Adams: Software, Development. Bill Copeland: Data curation, Writing – review & editing. Charles Amoo: Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
13
B. Bass et al.
Data availability
The authors do not have permission to share data.
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by field work proposal CEBT105 under US Department of Energy Building Technologies Office Activity Number BT0305000, as well as Office of Electricity Activity Number TE1103000. This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript or allow others to do so, for United States Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-publicaccess-plan).
References
[1] New J, Garrison E, Adams M, Bass B, Guo T. Scaling beyond tax assessor data. 2020. [2] New J, Adams M, Bass B, Berres A, Clinton N. Model America - data and models of every U.S. building. 2021, URL https://doi.ccs.ornl.gov/ui/doi/339. [3] Garrison E, New J, Adams M. Accuracy of a crude approach to urban multi-scale building energy models compared to 15-min electricity use. 2019. [4] Garrison E, New J. Quality control methods for advanced metering infrastructure data. 2021. [5] Bass B, New J. Potential demand reduction from buildings in a simulated utility. 2019. [6] New J, Bass B, Berres A. Distribution of potential savings from urban-scale energy modeling of a utility. 2021. [7] Bass B, New J. Future meteorological year weather data from IPCC scenarios. 2020. [8] Ang YQ, Berzolla ZM, Reinhart CF. From concept to application: A review of use cases in urban building energy modeling. Appl Energy 2020;279:115738. http: //dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115738, URL https://www.sciencedirect. com/science/article/pii/S0306261920312289. [9] Johari F, Peronato G, Sadeghian P, Zhao X, Widén J. Urban building energy modeling: State of the art and future prospects. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2020;128:109902. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2020.109902, URL https:// www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1364032120301933. [10] Reyna J, et al. U.S. building stock characterization study: A national typology for decarbonizing U.S. buildings. NREL/TP-5500-81186, National Renewable Energy Laboratory; 2021, URL https://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy22osti/81186.pdf. [11] Hong T, Chen Y, Luo X, Luo N, Lee SH. Ten questions on urban building energy modeling. Build Environ 2020;168:106508. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. buildenv.2019.106508, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0360132319307206. [12] An J, Yan D, Hong T. Clustering and statistical analyses of airconditioning intensity and use patterns in residential buildings. Energy Build 2018;174:214–27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2018.06.035, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378778818307199. [13] Salehi MM, Terim B, Fedoruk L, Frisque A, Whitehead D, Bushe W. Improving the performance of a whole-building energy modeling tool by using post-occupancy measured data. In: Proceedings of BS 2013: 13th conference of the international building performance simulation association. 2013, p. 1683–9. [14] Fabi V, Andersen RV, Corgnati S, Olesen BW. Occupants’ window opening behaviour: A literature review of factors influencing occupant behaviour and models. Build Environ 2012;58:188–98. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ j.buildenv.2012.07.009, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0360132312001977. [15] Gunay HB, O’Brien W, Beausoleil-Morrison I. A critical review of observation studies, modeling, and simulation of adaptive occupant behaviors in offices. Build Environ 2013;70:31–47. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2013.07.020, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132313002187. [16] Langevin J, Wen J, Gurian PL. Simulating the human-building interaction: Development and validation of an agent-based model of office occupant behaviors. Build Environ 2015;88:27–45. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2014. 11.037, Interactions between human and building environment, URL https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132314004090.
[17] Pisello AL, Pignatta G, Castaldo VL, Cotana F. The impact of local microclimate boundary conditions on building energy performance. Sustainability 2015;7(7):9207–30. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/su7079207, URL https://www. mdpi.com/2071- 1050/7/7/9207. [18] Dorer V, Allegrini J, Orehounig K, Moonen P, Upadhyay G, Kämpf J, et al. Modelling the urban microclimate and its impact on the energy demand of buildings and building clusters. In: Proceedings of BS 2013: 13th conference of the international building performance simulation association. 2013, p. 34839, URL https://www.scopus.com/inward/record.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84886656074& partnerID=40&md5=d12197cfa208052672bfc7f8eb3e0157, cited By 36. [19] Sharmin T, Steemers K, Matzarakis A. Microclimatic modelling in assessing the impact of urban geometry on urban thermal environment. Sustainable Cities Soc 2017;34:293–308. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2017.07.006, URL https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S221067071730183X. [20] Burleyson CD, Voisin N, Taylor ZT, Xie Y, Kraucunas I. Simulated building energy demand biases resulting from the use of representative weather stations. Appl Energy 2018;209. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.08.244, URL https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1416671. [21] Sun K, Yan D, Hong T, Guo S. Stochastic modeling of overtime occupancy and its application in building energy simulation and calibration. Build Environ 2014;79:1–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2014.04.030, URL https:// www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132314001346. [22] Wetter M. A view on future building system modeling and simulation. In: Building performance simulation for design and operation. second ed.. p. 631–56. [23] van Dronkelaar C, Dowson M, Burman E, Spataru C, Mumovic D. A review of the energy performance gap and its underlying causes in non-domestic buildings. Front Mech Eng 2016;1:17. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fmech.2015.00017, URL https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmech.2015.00017. [24] Burman E, Rigamonti D, Kimpian J, Mumovic D. Performance gap and thermal modelling: A comparison of simulation results and actual energy performance for an academy in North West England. 2012, p. 35–42. [25] Hong T, Langevin J, Sun K. Building simulation: Ten challenges. Build Simul 2018;11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12273-018-0444-x. [26] Reinhart CF, Cerezo Davila C. Urban building energy modeling – A review of a nascent field. Build Environ 2016;97:196–202. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ j.buildenv.2015.12.001, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0360132315003248. [27] Oraiopoulos A, Howard B. On the accuracy of urban building energy modelling. Renew Sustain Energy Rev 2022;158:111976. http://dx.doi.org/10. 1016/j.rser.2021.111976, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/S1364032121012405. [28] Liddard R, Godoy-Shimizu D, Ruyssevelt P, Steadman P, Evans S, Humphrey D, et al. Energy use intensities in London houses. Build Cities 2021;336–53. [29] Davila CC, Jones N, Al-Mumin A, Hajiah AE, Reinhart CF. Implementation of a calibrated urban building energy model ( UBEM ) for the evaluation of energy efficiency scenarios in a Kuwaiti residential neighborhood. 2017. [30] US Department of Energy. Openstudio. 2020, URL https://www.openstudio.net/. [31] US Department of Energy. Energyplus. 2020, URL https://energyplus.net/. [32] US Department of Energy. User quick start guide: Create DOE prototype building measure. 2019, URL https://www.energycodes.gov/prototype-building-models. [33] Szcześniak JT, Ang YQ, Letellier-Duchesne S, Reinhart CF. A method for using street view imagery to auto-extract window-to-wall ratios and its relevance for urban-level daylighting and energy simulations. Build Environ 2022;207:108108. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2021.108108, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132321005096. [34] Kang J, Körner M, Wang Y, Taubenböck H, Zhu XX. Building instance classification using street view images. ISPRS J Photogramm Remote Sens 2018;145:4459. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.isprsjprs.2018.02.006, Deep Learning RS Data. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0924271618300352. [35] Gorzalka P, Garbasevschi O, Estevam Schmiedt J, Droin A, Linkiewicz M, Wurm M, et al. Collecting data for urban building energy modelling by remote sensing and machine learning. 2021, http://dx.doi.org/10.26868/25222708. 2021.30184. [36] Sun M, Zhang F, Duarte F. Automatic building age prediction from street view images. In: 2021 7th IEEE international conference on network intelligence and digital content. 2021, p. 102–6. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IC-NIDC54101.2021. 9660554. [37] Salim FD, Dong B, Ouf M, Wang Q, Pigliautile I, Kang X, et al. Modelling urbanscale occupant behaviour, mobility, and energy in buildings: A survey. Build Environ 2020;183:106964. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.106964, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360132320303231. [38] Barbour E, Davila C, Gupta S, Reinhart C, Kaur J, Gonzalez MC. Planning for sustainable cities by estimating building occupancy with mobile phones. Nature Commun 2019;10. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-11685-w. [39] Berres A, Bass B, New JR, Im P, Urban M, Sanyal J. Generating traffic-based building occupancy schedules in Chattanooga, Tennessee from a grid of traffic sensors. In: Proceedings of building simulation 2021: 17th conference of IBPSA. Building simulation, vol. 17, Bruges, Belgium: IBPSA; 2021, p. 3616–23. http:// dx.doi.org/10.26868/25222708.2021.30744, URL https://publications.ibpsa.org/ conference/paper/?id=bs2021_30744.


Applied Energy 327 (2022) 120049
14
B. Bass et al.
[40] Wang J, Ye Y, Zuo W, New J, Rose A. City-scale building occupancy prediction using geographic information system data. 2021, http://dx.doi.org/10.31224/osf. io/658yb. [41] Mosteiro-Romero M, Hischier I, Fonseca JA, Schlueter A. A novel populationbased occupancy modeling approach for district-scale simulations compared to standard-based methods. Build Environ 2020;181:107084. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.buildenv.2020.107084, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0360132320304571. [42] Tadono T, Nagai H, Ishida H, Oda F, Naito S, Minakawa K, et al. Generation of the 30 M-mesh global digital surface model by alos prism. ISPRS - Int Arch Photogramm, Remote Sens Spat Inf Sci 2016;41B4:157–62. http://dx.doi.org/10. 5194/isprs- archives- XLI- B4- 157- 2016. [43] US Energy Information Administration. Residential energy consumption survey (recs). 2018, URL https://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/. [44] US Energy Information Administration. Commercial buildings energy consumption survey (cbecs). 2015, URL https://www.eia.gov/consumption/commercial/.
[45] Gong P, Li X, Wang J, Bai Y, Chen B, Hu T, et al. Annual maps of global artificial impervious area (GAIA) between 1985 and 2018. Remote Sens Environ 2020;236:111510. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2019.111510, URL https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0034425719305292. [46] Google. Google earth engine. URL https://earthengine.google.com/. [47] Crawley D, Lawrie L. Climate one building, URL https://climate.onebuilding.org/ default.html. [48] Energy Star. What is energy use intensity (EUI)? URL https://www.energystar. gov/buildings/benchmark/understand_metrics/what_eui. [49] United States Census Bureau. US census data profiles. 2022, URL https://www. census.gov/acs/www/data/data- tables- and- tools/data- profiles/. [50] Nutkiewicz A, Yang Z, Jain RK. Data-driven urban energy simulation (DUE-S): A framework for integrating engineering simulation and machine learning methods in a multi-scale urban energy modeling workflow. Appl Energy 2018;225:1176–89. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.05.023, URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306261918307165.